---
layout: post
title:  "mruby 2.1.0 released"
date:   2019-11-19 00:00:00
categories: releases
---

# mruby 2.1.0

We are proudly announcing the stable release of mruby 2.0 series - [mruby 2.1.0](https://github.com/mruby/mruby/releases/tag/2.1.0).  
The [mruby 2.1.0](https://github.com/mruby/mruby/releases/tag/2.1.0) has been enhanced with compatibility with Ruby 2 series, and some new features of Ruby 2.7 have been added.

---

# New Features

## Core Language Features

- Suffix support (`Rational` and `Complex` literals) (#4125)

## Core Libraries

### Ruby 2.7 features

- Add `Array#intersection` method which returns a new array containing elements common to both arrays. (mrbgems/mruby-array-ext)
- Add `Enumerable#filter_map` method which is a short hand for `filter` + `map` in a single call. (mrbgems/mruby-enum-ext)
- Add `Enumerable#tally` method which group and count elements of the collection. (mrbgems/mruby-enum-ext)
- Add `Enumerator.produce` method which creates an infinite enumerator from any block. (mrbgems/mruby-enumerator)
- Add `UnboundMethod#bind_call` method which call a method that overridden without allocation of intermediate Method object. (mruby-method)
- `Module#name`, `true#to_s`, `false#to_s` return a frozen string. The returned string is always the same object.

### Ruby 2.6 features

- Add `Array#difference` method:  
`Array#difference` returns a new array that is a copy of the original array, removing any items that also appear in other_ary. (mrbgems/mruby-array-ext)

### New Libraries

- Add `mrbgems/mruby-rational`:  
`Rational` class has been included into the core library, and rational numbers like `1/3` can be handled.
- Add `mrbgems/mruby-complex`:  
`Complex` class has been included into the core library to handle complex numbers.

### New C APIs

#### Macros for checking object type

```c
mrb_false_p(o)
mrb_true_p(o)
mrb_free_p(o)
mrb_object_p(o)
mrb_class_p(o)
mrb_module_p(o)
mrb_iclass_p(o)
mrb_sclass_p(o)
mrb_proc_p(o)
mrb_range_p(o)
mrb_file_p(o)
mrb_env_p(o)
mrb_data_p(o)
mrb_fiber_p(o)
mrb_istruct_p(o)
mrb_break_p(o)
```

#### mruby core (mruby.h)

```c
MRB_API mrb_int mrb_cmp(mrb_state *mrb, mrb_value obj1, mrb_value obj2);
```

#### mruby binary (mruby/dump.h, mruby/irep.h)

```c
MRB_API mrb_irep *mrb_read_irep_buf(mrb_state*, const void*, size_t);   // mruby/dump.h
MRB_API mrb_value mrb_load_irep_buf(mrb_state*, const void*, size_t);   // mruby/irep.h
MRB_API mrb_value mrb_load_irep_buf_cxt(mrb_state*, const void*, size_t, mrbc_context*);   // mruby/irep.h
```

#### Numeric class (mruby/numeric.h)

```c
MRB_API mrb_value mrb_num_plus(mrb_state *mrb, mrb_value x, mrb_value y);
MRB_API mrb_value mrb_num_minus(mrb_state *mrb, mrb_value x, mrb_value y);
MRB_API mrb_value mrb_num_mul(mrb_state *mrb, mrb_value x, mrb_value y);
MRB_API mrb_value mrb_int_value(mrb_state *mrb, mrb_float f);
```

#### String class (mruby/string.h)

```c
MRB_API void mrb_str_modify_keep_ascii(mrb_state *mrb, struct RString *s);
MRB_API const char *mrb_string_cstr(mrb_state *mrb, mrb_value str);
```

#### mruby/value.h

- Add customized `mrb_ro_data_p()` (#4408)

#### Enumerable module and Hash class

- Add `filter` aliases for `Enumerable` and `Hash`. (57a0132b)

## Configuration

- (Proof of Concept) mruby tuning profiles (#4446)

## mrbtest

### Test Features

- Warn if assertion is missing inside `assert` (#4320)

### New test method (mrbtest)

```ruby
assert_match(pattern, str, msg=nil)
assert_not_match(pattern, str, msg=nil)
assert_raise_with_message(exc, exp_msg, msg = nil, &block
assert_raise_with_message_pattern(exc, exp_msg, msg = nil, &block)
assert_not_nil(target, msg)
```

## Tools

### Interactive mruby (mirb)

- As with `irb` in Ruby, a local variable `_` is added to store the last result.

---
# Update Features

## mruby core

- Allow newlines and comments between method calls. (4296c77e)
- Support `&.` at the beginning of the line (4124047c)

## Build system

- Support lock file  
It is now possible to fix mruby and mrbgems versions in products that use mruby.
- Rename MRB_USE_ETEXT_EDATA to MRB_USE_LINK_TIME_RO_DATA_P and support lld linked programs (#4716)

## C APIs

### mruby core

- Keyword arguments can be obtained with `mrb_get_args` using the format string `:`.
- `mrb_parser_dump` supports displaying `NODE_DSYM`, `NODE_WORDS`, `NODE_SYMBOLS` and `NODE_LITERAL_DELIM`.
- Raise `ArgumentError` by `aspec` check. (30f37872)

### src/error.c

- Add new specifiers/modifiers to format string of `mrb_vfromat()` (#4608)

## mrbtest

- Nested `assert` for mrbtest (#4540)

---
# Compatibility

## mruby core

- Pad leading zero to month and day in `MRUBY_RELEASE_DATE` (#4353)

## Core Libraries

- Add `Class#new(*args, &block)` method.
- Add optional argument to `Module#class_variables`.
- Add constants for floating point number. (`RADIX`, `MANT_DIG`, `EPSILON`, `DIG`, `MIN_EXP`, `MIN`, `MIN_10_EXP`, `MAX_EXP`, `MAX`, `MAX_10_EXP`)
- Removed `$1`..`$9` from `Kernel#global_variables`.
- String#unpack/Array#pack does support base64 directive (`m`).
- Add encoding argument to `Integral#chr` (#4593)
- Fixed `length` for IO should be in bytes, not in characters (8c90b5fc)

---
# Breaking Changes

There are three major breaking changes from mruby 2.0.1.

## Changed methods

- Move `Array#append` and `Array#prepend` from core to `mrbgems/mruby-ary-ext`.
- Move `Numeric#div` from `mrbgems/mruby-numeric-ext` to the core.
- Move `Integral#zero?`, `Integral#nonzero?`, `Integral#positive?` and `Integral#negative)?` to `Numeric` class.
- Move `Numeric#__coerce_step_counter` to `Integral` class.
- Move `Kernel#instance_exec`, `Kernel#equal?` and `Kernel#instance_eval` to `BasicObject` class.
- Move `NilClass#to_h` to `mrbgems/mruby-object-ext` from `mrbgems/mruby-enum-ext`
- Move `String#getbyte`, `String#setbyte` and `String#byteslice` to the core. (#4696)
- Remove `Kernel#global_variables` from core. This method is defined in `mrbgems/mruby-metaprog`.
- Integrate `Integral#chr` (`Fixnum#chr`) to `mrbgems/mruby-string-ext`.
- Remove `String#=~` and `String#match` that requires `Regexp` (fd37bc53)
- `Symbol#to_s` return a frozen string. The returned string is always the same object. This feature will be reverted next mruby, because which reverted from Ruby 2.7.
- Explicit `.0` is removed from result of `Float#to_s` and `Float#inspect`. (9d08025b)

## Change C APIs

- Rename symbol-to-string functions. (#4684)  
  - `mrb_sym2name()` -> `mrb_sym_name()`
  - `mrb_sym2name_len()` -> `mrb_sym_name_len()`
  - `mrb_sym2str()` -> `mrb_sym_str()`

## Remove C APIs

- Functions to remove `MRB_API` from definitions (referenced from within `libmruby`):  
`mrb_instance_new()`, `mrb_vm_define_class()`, `mrb_vm_define_module()`
- `struct RIstruct` is renamed to `struct RIStruct` (e41f1574)
* Remove `mrb_fixnum_plus()`, `mrb_fixnum_minus()`, `mrb_fixnum_mul()`, and `mrb_num_div()`. Use `mrb_num_plus()`, `mrb_num_minus()`, `mrb_num_mul()` instead.
- Remove a member `ary` of `struct RString`. `struct RStringEmbed` is used for String embedding. (#4646)

## mruby core

- Remove global variable `$/`. The current Ruby policy do not encourage Perl-ish global variables.
- Remove `MRB_TT_HAS_BASIC` macro. (#4728)
- Remove members `flags` and `mems` of `struct mrb_state`. (0c5f26e0 and #4470)

## Configuration

- Remove `MRB_METHOD_TABLE_INLINE` and `MRB_NO_INIT_ARRAY_START`. (2256bb07 and #4716)
- `MRB_USE_ETEXT_EDATA` is deprecated (warned and ignored). instead, use `MRB_USE_LINK_TIME_RO_DATA_P`. (#4716)

## mruby binary (MRB)

- Remove "LINE" section reader. (#4455)

---
# Major bug fixes

- `SystemStackError` is raised from `String#=~`. (#4363)
- Null pointer dereference in ecall. (#4370)
- mismatched shift functions. (#4380)
- Compilation error with "MRB_ARY_EMBED_LEN_MAX" in "array.h". (#4382)
- Fixed a bug in recursive `mrb_top_run` calls; fix (#4384)
- Unexpected error: `Can't get cfunc env from non-cfunc proc.` (#4389)
- build error on master by MRB_WITHOUT_FLOAT. (#4478)
- Null pointer dereference in mrb_str_cat_str. (#4504)
- Some comments do not increment lineno on context. (#4513)
- Null pointer dereference in mrb_check_frozen. (#4519)
- Invalid read in mrb_class. (#4534)
- Array#inspect recurses too much for self-referential arrays. (#4552)
- Infinite loop in Integer#step when both args are INFINITY. (#4555)
- Float#round hangs for large ndigits. (#4566)
- Cannot call `Fiber.yield` in method. (#4567)
- Reference to top-level variable in top-level block is broken. (#4581)
- Bugs with mutually recursive Array and Hash. (#4582)
- `mrb_gc_unregister()` may access freed memory. (#4618)
- memcpy-param-overlap in str_replace_partial. (#4627)
- Symbol#inspect does not handle Unicode characters. (#4678)
- mrb_funcall returns odd value. (#4696)
- behavior of alias is defferent from CRuby. (#4718)
- compile error at master by clang 9. (#4786)

---

We have done 912 commits to 229 files, 12,006 lines were added, 5,382 lines removed since mruby 2.0.1. For more detail of the updates, [see Commit Log](https://github.com/mruby/mruby/compare/2.0.1...stable).

Let's try `mruby 2.1.0`.
